[The Ball and The Cross by G.K. Chesterton 1909]


I. A DISCUSSION SOMEWHAT IN THE AIR

The flying ship of Professor Lucifer sang through the skies like
a silver arrow; the bleak white steel of it, gleaming in the
bleak blue emptiness of the evening.  That it was far above the
earth was no expression for it; to the two men in it, it seemed
to be far above the stars.  The professor had himself invented
the flying machine, and had also invented nearly everything in
it.  Every sort of tool or apparatus had, in consequence, to the
full, that fantastic and distorted look which belongs to the
miracles of science.  For the world of science and evolution is
far more nameless and elusive and like a dream than the world of
poetry and religion; since in the latter images and ideas remain
themselves eternally, while it is the whole idea of evolution
that identities melt into each other as they do in a nightmare.

All the tools of Professor Lucifer were the ancient human tools
gone mad, grown into unrecognizable shapes, forgetful of their
origin, forgetful of their names.  That thing which looked like an
enormous key with three wheels was really a patent and very
deadly revolver.  That object which seemed to be created by the
entanglement of two corkscrews was really the key.  The thing
which might have been mistaken for a tricycle turned upside-down
was the inexpressibly important instrument to which the corkscrew
was the key.  All these things, as I say, the professor had
invented; he had invented everything in the flying ship, with the
exception, perhaps, of himself.  This he had been born too late
actually to inaugurate, but he believed at least, that he had
considerably improved it.

There was, however, another man on board, so to speak, at the
time.  Him, also, by a curious coincidence, the professor had not
invented, and him he had not even very greatly improved, though
he had fished him up with a lasso out of his own back garden, in
Western Bulgaria, with the pure object of improving him.  He was
an exceedingly holy man, almost entirely covered with white hair.
You could see nothing but his eyes, and he seemed to talk with
them.  A monk of immense learning and acute intellect he had made
himself happy in a little stone hut and a little stony garden in
the Balkans, chiefly by writing the most crushing refutations of
exposures of certain heresies, the last professors of which had
been burnt (generally by each other) precisely 1,119 years
previously.  They were really very plausible and thoughtful
heresies, and it was really a creditable or even glorious
circumstance, that the old monk had been intellectual enough to
detect their fallacy; the only misfortune was that nobody in the
modern world was intellectual enough even to understand their
argument.  The old monk, one of whose names was Michael, and the
other a name quite impossible to remember or repeat in our
Western civilization, had, however, as I have said, made himself
quite happy while he was in a mountain hermitage in the society
of wild animals.  And now that his luck had lifted him above all
the mountains in the society of a wild physicist, he made himself
happy still.

"I have no intention, my good Michael," said Professor Lucifer,
"of endeavouring to convert you by argument.  The imbecility of
your traditions can be quite finally exhibited to anybody with
mere ordinary knowledge of the world, the same kind of knowledge
which teaches us not to sit in draughts or not to encourage
friendliness in impecunious people.  It is folly to talk of this
or that demonstrating the rationalist philosophy.  Everything
demonstrates it.  Rubbing shoulders with men of all kinds----"

"You will forgive me," said the monk, meekly from under loads of
white beard, "but I fear I do not understand; was it in order
that I might rub my shoulder against men of all kinds that you
put me inside this thing?"

"An entertaining retort, in the narrow and deductive manner of
the Middle Ages," replied the Professor, calmly, "but even upon
your own basis I will illustrate my point.  We are up in the sky.
In your religion and all the religions, as far as I know (and I
know everything), the sky is made the symbol of everything that
is sacred and merciful.  Well, now you are in the sky, you know
better.  Phrase it how you like, twist it how you like, you know
that you know better.  You know what are a man's real feelings
about the heavens, when he finds himself alone in the heavens,
surrounded by the heavens.  You know the truth, and the truth is
this.  The heavens are evil, the sky is evil, the stars are evil.
This mere space, this mere quantity, terrifies a man more than
tigers or the terrible plague.  You know that since our science
has spoken, the bottom has fallen out of the Universe.  Now,
heaven is the hopeless thing, more hopeless than any hell.  Now,
if there be any comfort for all your miserable progeny of morbid
apes, it must be in the earth, underneath you, under the roots of
the grass, in the place where hell was of old.  The fiery crypts,
the lurid cellars of the underworld, to which you once condemned
the wicked, are hideous enough, but at least they are more homely
than the heaven in which we ride.  And the time will come when you
will all hide in them, to escape the horror of the stars."

"I hope you will excuse my interrupting you," said Michael, with
a slight cough, "but I have always noticed----"

"Go on, pray go on," said Professor Lucifer, radiantly, "I really
like to draw out your simple ideas."

"Well, the fact is," said the other, "that much as I admire your
rhetoric and the rhetoric of your school, from a purely verbal
point of view, such little study of you and your school in human
history as I have been enabled to make has led me to--er--rather
singular conclusion, which I find great difficulty in expressing,
especially in a foreign language."

"Come, come," said the Professor, encouragingly, "I'll help you
out. How did my view strike you?"

"Well, the truth is, I know I don't express it properly, but
somehow it seemed to me that you always convey ideas of that kind
with most eloquence, when--er--when----"

"Oh! get on," cried Lucifer, boisterously.

"Well, in point of fact when your flying ship is just going to
run into something.  I thought you wouldn't mind my mentioning it,
but it's running into something now."

Lucifer exploded with an oath and leapt erect, leaning hard upon
the handle that acted as a helm to the vessel.  For the last ten
minutes they had been shooting downwards into great cracks and
caverns of cloud.  Now, through a sort of purple haze, could be
seen comparatively near to them what seemed to be the upper part
of a huge, dark orb or sphere, islanded in a sea of cloud.  The
Professor's eyes were blazing like a maniac's.

"It is a new world," he cried, with a dreadful mirth.  "It is a
new planet and it shall bear my name.  This star and not that
other vulgar one shall be 'Lucifer, sun of the morning.'  Here we
will have no chartered lunacies, here we will have no gods.  Here
man shall be as innocent as the daisies, as innocent and as
cruel--here the intellect----"

"There seems," said Michael, timidly, "to be something sticking
up in the middle of it."

"So there is," said the Professor, leaning over the side of the
ship, his spectacles shining with intellectual excitement.  "What
can it be? It might of course be merely a----"

Then a shriek indescribable broke out of him of a sudden, and he
flung up his arms like a lost spirit.  The monk took the helm in a
tired way; he did not seem much astonished for he came from an
ignorant part of the world in which it is not uncommon for lost
spirits to shriek when they see the curious shape which the
Professor had just seen on the top of the mysterious ball, but he
took the helm only just in time, and by driving it hard to the
left he prevented the flying ship from smashing into St. Paul's
Cathedral.

A plain of sad-coloured cloud lay along the level of the top of
the Cathedral dome, so that the ball and the cross looked like a
buoy riding on a leaden sea.  As the flying ship swept towards it,
this plain of cloud looked as dry and definite and rocky as any
grey desert.  Hence it gave to the mind and body a sharp and
unearthly sensation when the ship cut and sank into the cloud as
into any common mist, a thing without resistance.  There was, as
it were, a deadly shock in the fact that there was no shock.  It
was as if they had cloven into ancient cliffs like so much
butter.  But sensations awaited them which were much stranger than
those of sinking through the solid earth.  For a moment their eyes
and nostrils were stopped with darkness and opaque cloud; then
the darkness warmed into a kind of brown fog.  And far, far below
them the brown fog fell until it warmed into fire.  Through the
dense London atmosphere they could see below them the flaming
London lights; lights which lay beneath them in squares and
oblongs of fire.  The fog and fire were mixed in a passionate
vapour; you might say that the fog was drowning the flames; or
you might say that the flames had set the fog on fire.  Beside the
ship and beneath it (for it swung just under the ball), the
immeasurable dome itself shot out and down into the dark like a
combination of voiceless cataracts.  Or it was like some cyclopean
sea-beast sitting above London and letting down its tentacles
bewilderingly on every side, a monstrosity in that starless
heaven.  For the clouds that belonged to London had closed over
the heads of the voyagers sealing up the entrance of the upper
air.  They had broken through a roof and come into a temple of
twilight.

They were so near to the ball that Lucifer leaned his hand
against it, holding the vessel away, as men push a boat off from
a bank.  Above it the cross already draped in the dark mists of
the borderland was shadowy and more awful in shape and size.

Professor Lucifer slapped his hand twice upon the surface of th